Blog post on using UDFs in python (#17)
apache/datafusion-site: _posts/2024-08-06-datafusion-python-udf-comparisons.md

The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->
# Writing User Defined Functions in Apache Datafusion using Python

## Personal Context

For a few months now I’ve been working with Apache DataFusion, a fast query engine written in rust.
From my experience the language that nearly all data scientists are working in is Python. In
general, for in memory work people often stick to pandas and pyspark for larger tasks that cannot
fit into memory. Polars is also growing extremely fast.

Personally, I would love a single query approach that is fast for both in memory usage and can
extend to large batch processing to exploit parallelization. I think DataFusion, coupled with

> Ballista, may provide this solution.

Reviewer: You mention Polars but then in the next line come back to DataFusion. It might be worth a line to say why you decided on DataFusion over Polars, since they seem to have relatively similar goals here. Or maybe take out the polars reference if this blog post isn't really meant as a comparison to polars?

As I’m testing, I’m primarily limiting my work to the datafusion-python project, a wrapper around
the rust library. This wrapper gives you the speed advantages of keeping all of the data in the
rust implementation and the ergonomics of working in python. Personally, I would prefer to work
purely in rust, but I also recognize that since the industry works in python we should meet the
people where they are.

## User Defined Functions

> The focus of this post is User Defined Functions. The DataFusion library gives a lot of useful

Reviewer: Nit: there's usually a hyphen for user-defined

> functions already for doing dataframe manipulation. These are going to be similar to those you

Reviewer: Nit: should there be consistent casing for `DataFrame`?

find in other dataframe libraries. You’ll be able to do simple arithmetic, create substrings of
columns, or find the average value across a group of rows. These cover most of the use cases
you’ll need in a DataFrame.

> However, there will always arise times when you want a custom function. By using user defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there will always arise times when you want a custom function. With user defined
```

> functions (UDFs) you open the world of possibilities of your code. Sometimes there simply isn’t an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions (UDFs) you open a world of possibilities in your code. Sometimes there simply isn’t an
```

> easy way to use built in functions to achieve your goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easy way to use built-in functions to achieve your goals.
```

determined there is a noise level below which I do not want to include in my analysis. I want to
compute a sum of only values that are above my noise threshold.

This can be done fairly easy without leaning on a User Defined Aggegate Function (UDAF). You can
simply filter the dataframe and then aggregate using the built in `sum` function. Here, we
demonstrate doing this as a UDF primarily as an example of how to write UDAFs. We will use the
pyarrow compute approach.

## Pure Python approach

The fastest way (developer time, not code time) for me to implement the scalar problem solution
was to do something along the lines of “for each row, check the values of interest contains that
tuple”. I’ve published this as [an example](https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/blob/main/examples/python-udf-comparisons.py)
in the [datafusion-python repository](https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python). Here is an
example of how this can be done:

```python
values_of_interest = [
    (1530, 4031, "N"),
    (6530, 1531, "N"),
    (5618, 619, "N"),
    (8118, 8119, "N"),
]

def is_of_interest_impl(
    partkey_arr: pa.Array,
    suppkey_arr: pa.Array,
    returnflag_arr: pa.Array,

> ) -> pa.Array:

Reviewer: I think it might be helpful here to describe your problem a little bit. Say what `partkey_arr` is representing, and how it relates to your `values_of_interest` above.

Author: I had a smaller statement in the earlier section, but I've expanded it because it was easy to pass over.

    result = []
    for idx, partkey in enumerate(partkey_arr):
        partkey = partkey.as_py()
        suppkey = suppkey_arr[idx].as_py()
        returnflag = returnflag_arr[idx].as_py()
        value = (partkey, suppkey, returnflag)
        result.append(value in values_of_interest)

    return pa.array(result)

> is_of_interest = udf(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Wrap our custom function with `datafusion.udf`, annotating expected 
# parameter and return types
is_of_interest = udf(
```

As a separate note, it wouldn't be hard to convert this `udf` function wrapper into a Python decorator, so we could do

```py
@udf(args=(pa.int64(), pa.int64(), pa.utf8()), returns=pa.bool_(), "stable")
def is_of_interest(
    partkey_arr: pa.Array,
    suppkey_arr: pa.Array,
    returnflag_arr: pa.Array,
) -> pa.Array: ...
```

Author: Great idea. I've added it to the issue list https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/issues/806

the tuple created from these columns matches any of those that we’re looking for.

I’ll repeat because this is something that tripped me up the first time I wrote a UDF for
datafusion: **Datafusion UDFs, even scalar UDFs, process an array of values at a time not a single
row.** This is different from some other dataframe libraries and you may need to recognize a slight
change in mentality.

Some important lines here are the lines like `partkey = partkey.as_py()`. When we do this, we pay a
heavy cost. Now instead of keeping the analysis in the rust code, we have to take the values in the
array and convert them over to python objects. In this case we end up getting two numbers and a
string as real python objects, complete with reference counting and all. Also we are iterating
through the array in python rather than rust native. These will **significantly** slow down your
code. Any time you have to cross the barrier where you change values inside the rust arrays into
python objects or vice versa you will pay **heavy** cost in that transformation. You will want to
design your UDFs to avoid this as much as possible.

## Python approach using pyarrow compute

> DataFusion uses [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) as it’s in memory data format. This can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DataFusion uses [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) as its in-memory data format. This can
```

be seen in the way that Arrow Arrays are passed into the UDFs. We can take advantage of the fact

> that [pyarrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs), the python arrow wrapper, provides a variety of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that [pyarrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/), the canonical Python Arrow implementation, provides a variety of
```

useful functions. In the example below, we are only using a few of the boolean functions and the
equality function. Each of these functions takes two arrays and analyzes them row by row. In the
below example, we shift the logic around a little since we are now operating on an entire array of
values instead of checking a single row ourselves.

```python
import pyarrow.compute as pc

def udf_using_pyarrow_compute_impl(
    partkey_arr: pa.Array,
    suppkey_arr: pa.Array,
    returnflag_arr: pa.Array,
) -> pa.Array:
    results = None

>     for partkey, suppkey, returnflag in values_of_interest:

Reviewer: I think you can use `pyarrow.is_in` to speed this up, instead of doing an equality check multiple times: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/generated/pyarrow.compute.is_in.html

expect to be small. For each of the columns, we compare the value of interest to it’s corresponding
array using `pyarrow.compute.equal`. This will give use three boolean arrays. We have a match to
the tuple if we have a row in all three arrays that is true, so we use `pyarrow.compute.and_`. Now
our return value from the UDF needs to include arrays for which any of the values of interest list
of tuples exists, so we take the result from the current loop and perform a `pyarrow.compute.or_`
on it.

From my benchmarking, switching from approach of converting values into python objects to this
approach of using the pyarrow built in functions leads to about a 10x speed improvement in this
simple problem.

It’s worth noting that almost all of the pyarrow compute functions expect to take one or two arrays
as their arguments. If you need to write a UDF that is evaluating three or more columns, you’ll
need to do something akin to what we’ve shown here.

## Rust UDF with Python wrapper

This is the most complicated approach, but has the potential to be the most performant. What we
will do here is write a Rust function to perform our computation and then expose that function to

> python. I know of two use cases where I would recommend this approach. The first is the case when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python. I know of two use cases where I would recommend this approach. The first is the case when
```

the pyarrow compute functions are insufficient for your needs. Perhaps your code is too complex or
could be greatly simplified if you pulled in some outside dependency. The second use case is when
you have written a UDF that you’re sharing across multiple projects and have hardened the approach.

> It is possible that you can implement your function in rust to give a speed improvement and then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible that you can implement your function in Rust to give a speed improvement and then
```

every project that is using this shared UDF will benefit from those updates.

> When deciding to use this approach, it’s worth considering how much you think you’ll actually
> benefit from the rust implementation to decide if it’s worth the additional effort to maintain and
> deploy the python wheels you generate. It is certainly not necessary for every use case.

Reviewer: Capitalization nits: up to you if you wish to update them
```suggestion
When deciding to use this approach, it’s worth considering how much you think you’ll actually
benefit from the Rust implementation to decide if it’s worth the additional effort to maintain and
deploy the Python wheels you generate. It is certainly not necessary for every use case.
```

Due to the excellent work by the python arrow team, we can simplify our work to needing only two
dependencies on the rust side, [arrow-rs](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) and
[pyo3](https://pyo3.rs/). I have posted a [minimal example](https://github.com/timsaucer/tuple_filter_example).

> You’ll need [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin) to build the project, and I recommend using
> release mode when building.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You’ll need [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin) to build the project, and you must use release mode when building to get the expected performance.
```

lifting portions of the code are essentially the same between this rust implementation and the
pyarrow approach above.

The reason for demonstrating this, even though it doesn’t provide a significant speedup over
python, is to primarily demonstrate how to make the python to rust with python wrapper
transition. In the second implementation you can see how we can iterate through all of the arrays
ourselves.

```rust
#[pyfunction]
pub fn tuple_filter_fn(
    py: Python<'_>,
    partkey_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
    suppkey_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
    returnflag_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
) -> PyResult<Py<PyAny>> {
    let partkey_arr: PrimitiveArray<Int64Type> =
        ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(partkey_expr)?.into();
    let suppkey_arr: PrimitiveArray<Int64Type> =
        ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(suppkey_expr)?.into();
    let returnflag_arr: StringArray = ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(returnflag_expr)?.into();

    let values_of_interest = vec![
        (1530, 4031, "N".to_string()),
        (6530, 1531, "N".to_string()),
        (5618, 619, "N".to_string()),
        (8118, 8119, "N".to_string()),

>     ];

Reviewer: Ah one big difference here is that you're hard-coding the values of interest in Rust at compile time rather than the user being able to supply it at runtime. There's probably in theory some ways around this, where you can export to rust a wrapper function that you would call with your `values_of_interest` from Python, but it could be a little tricky.

        let part_and_supp = compute::and(&filtered_partkey_arr, &filtered_suppkey_arr)
            .map_err(|e| PyValueError::new_err(e.to_string()))?;
        let resultant_arr = compute::and(&part_and_supp, &filtered_returnflag_arr)
            .map_err(|e| PyValueError::new_err(e.to_string()))?;

        res = match res {
            Some(r) => compute::or(&r, &resultant_arr).ok(),
            None => Some(resultant_arr),
        };
    }

    res.unwrap().into_data().to_pyarrow(py)
}

#[pymodule]
fn tuple_filter_example(module: &Bound<'_, PyModule>) -> PyResult<()> {
    module.add_function(wrap_pyfunction!(tuple_filter_fn, module)?)?;
    Ok(())
}
```

To use this we use the `udf` function in datafusion-python just as before.

```python
from datafusion import udf
import pyarrow as pa
from tuple_filter_example import tuple_filter_fn

udf_using_custom_rust_fn = udf(
    tuple_filter_fn,
    [pa.int64(), pa.int64(), pa.utf8()],
    pa.bool_(),
    "stable",
)
```

That's it! We've now got a third party rust UDF with python wrappers working with DataFusion's
python bindings!

### Rust UDF with initialization

> Looking at the code above, you can see that it is hard coding the values we're interested in. There

Reviewer: Oh, oops haha you caught me!

    values_of_interest: Vec<(i64, i64, String)>,
}

#[pymethods]
impl TupleFilterDirectIterationClass {
    #[new]
    fn new(values_of_interest: Vec<(i64, i64, String)>) -> Self {
        Self { values_of_interest }
    }

    fn __call__(
        &self,
        py: Python<'_>,
        partkey_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
        suppkey_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
        returnflag_expr: &Bound<'_, PyAny>,
    ) -> PyResult<Py<PyAny>> {
        let partkey_arr: PrimitiveArray<Int64Type> =
            ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(partkey_expr)?.into();
        let suppkey_arr: PrimitiveArray<Int64Type> =
            ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(suppkey_expr)?.into();
        let returnflag_arr: StringArray = ArrayData::from_pyarrow_bound(returnflag_expr)?.into();

        let values_to_search: Vec<(&i64, &i64, &str)> = (&self.values_of_interest)
            .iter()
            .map(|(a, b, c)| (a, b, c.as_str()))
            .collect();

        let values = partkey_arr
            .values()
            .iter()
            .zip(suppkey_arr.values().iter())
            .zip(returnflag_arr.iter())
            .map(|((a, b), c)| (a, b, c.unwrap_or_default()))

>             .map(|v| values_to_search.contains(&v));

Reviewer: This is faster I suppose because it's not doing a boolean check on each individual array in its entirety and _then_ ORing them? It's doing it all at once in a single pass?

Author: Yes, I didn't dive any deeper but my expectation is that by doing a single pass through the iteration we'll get a small speed improvement. It my modest test it only accounted for about a 5% boost.

        let res: BooleanArray = BooleanBuffer::from_iter(values).into();

        res.into_data().to_pyarrow(py)
    }
}
```

We convert the `values_of_interest` into a vector of borrowed types so that we can do a fast search
without creating additional memory. The other option is to turn the `returnflag` into a `String`

> but that memory allocation is unnecessary. After taht we use two `zip` operations so that we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but that memory allocation is unnecessary. After that we use two `zip` operations so that we can
```

improvement. Then as we increase our complexity from using pyarrow compute functions to
implementing the UDF in rust we see incremental improvements. Our fastest approach - iterating
through the arrays ourselves does operate nearly 10% faster than the pyarrow compute approach.

## Final Thoughts and Recommendations

For anyone who is curious about [DataFusion](https://datafusion.apache.org/) I highly recommend
giving it a try. This post was designed to make it easier for new users to the python implementation
to work with User Defined Functions by giving a few examples of how one might implement these.

When it comes to designing UDFs, I strongly recommend seeing if you can write your UDF using
[pyarrow functions](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/api/compute.html) rather than pure python
objects. These will give you enormous speed benefits. If you must do something that isn't well
represented by the pyarrow compute functions, then I would consider using a Rust based UDF in the
manner shown above.

Lastly, the Apache Arrow and DataFusion community is an active group of very helpful people working
to make a great tool. If you want to get involved, please take a look at the

> [online documenation](https://datafusion.apache.org/python/) and jump in to help with one of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[online documentation](https://datafusion.apache.org/python/) and jump in to help with one of the
```

            .values()
            .iter()
            .zip(suppkey_arr.values().iter())
            .zip(returnflag_arr.iter())
            .map(|((a, b), c)| (a, b, c.unwrap_or_default()))
            .map(|v| values_to_search.contains(&v));

        let res: BooleanArray = BooleanBuffer::from_iter(values).into();

        res.into_data().to_pyarrow(py)
    }
}
```

We convert the `values_of_interest` into a vector of borrowed types so that we can do a fast search
without creating additional memory. The other option is to turn the `returnflag` into a `String`
but that memory allocation is unnecessary. After that we use two `zip` operations so that we can
iterate over all three columns in a single pass. Since each `zip` will return a tuple of two
elements, a quick `map` turns them into the tuple format we need. Also, `StringArray` is a little
different in the buffer it uses, so it is treated slightly differently from the others.

## User Defined Aggregate Function

Writing a user defined aggregate function or user defined window function is slightly more complex
than scalar functions. This is because we must accumulate values and there is no guarantee that one

> batch will contain off the values we are aggregating over. For this we need to define an

Reviewer 2: should be "will contain all the values..."

`Accumulator` which will do a few things.

- Process a batch and compute an internal state
- Share the state so that we can combine multiple batches
- Merge the results across multiple batches
- Return the final result

In the example below, we're going to look at customer orders and we want to know per customer ID,

> how much they have ordered total. We want to ignore small orders, which we define as anything over

Reviewer 2: small orders should be anything below 5000
